Martin, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Great to have you here.
Thanks for having me.
I'm excited to talk about static sites
and the next big platform for building them here
in Python and beyond.
So really excited to talk about Zensical.
Am I saying that right?
Yeah, pretty much.
Zensical.
Zensical, OK.
Great.
Yeah.
I know MKDocs, the material for MKDocs, has been really, really popular.
And you all have made a big splash announcing this new project.
So I'm really looking forward to diving into it.
Before we do, though, let's just get a little bit of background on you.
Who is Martin?
Of course.
So hi, my name is Martin Donath.
Most people probably know me as Squidfunk.
I've been an independent developer and consultant for the last 20 years now.
And I mostly write in TypeScript, Python, and lately a lot of Rust.
So I've become a huge fan of Rust, actually.
I'm kind of a free spirit.
So I love doing my own thing and building products from front to back, basically.
So doing the front end as well as the back end.
And for the past 15 years, I contributed a lot to open source.
As already mentioned, my most popular project so far is Material for MKDocs.
And it's, well, millions of people basically look at sites
that are built with it every day.
Yeah, well, and Zanziko, my latest project,
will hopefully go far beyond that.
So we're working very hard on it.
And this is why I'm here today.
So excited to talk about it.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, I am as well.
And let's just start by admiring your website a little bit.
BRIAN FITZPATRICK: Thanks.
MARK MANDEL: Brian and I spoke about this over on our Python
Bytes podcasts. And we kind of just got distracted just staring at the website. It's this beautiful
flow of, I don't know, colors. It looks a little bit like a black hole worm, a white wormhole
sort of experience. I don't know. What was the inspiration there at this cool design?
Yeah, this is actually a strange attractor. So this is something from physics. I'm not very,
very proficient in physics but those strange attractors uh have i have fascination for them
for a very long time and they follow very simple rules so it's just three equations that define
how their points move in in three-dimensional space and yeah but still with those simple rules
very complex shape can emerge and this is for us actually symbolizes the process of evolving ideas
through writing so if you have slightly different conditions from the start um it's still um
orbiting around the same shape but it might look a little bit different and there's actually i can
share this now there's actually a little easter egg nobody has found it so far so if you hover
over the home page on zensicle.org with the mouse in the left bottom corner you can um you can
actually change the coefficients of the animation and if you do this so you you can click on them
and then you can use your cursor i'm changing i'm changing beta we're running beta 0.22 right now
oh it really does change it yeah oh my goodness yeah so it's um it it takes a little it takes a
little time but um if you change the coefficients in a specific way it might be completely chaotic
chaotic and become unstable so this is what i really find fascinating about those strange
attractors and it's also the inspiration for the logo um so we're building on this on this image a
lot okay i thought it was just a cool design i didn't realize it had all this meaning and
actual math and physics behind it that's super cool yeah i love chaos theory and all of
of these fractal type of ideas here.
And yeah, it's super neat.
OK, so what is Zintiql?
Why did you build it?
Why not just more material?
So there are a lot of questions in there, actually.
Maybe let me just start by shortly speaking about what it is.
So in very simple terms, it's a tool
to build beautiful websites from a folder of text files.
So you just write in Markdown and can generate a static site.
You don't need a database for it.
So to those who don't know what a static site is,
you don't need a database or server.
It's just static HTML, which means you just pip install
ZensiCode and you're ready to go within a few minutes.
And it's fully open source, MIT licensed.
And to maybe explain a little bit more about static sites,
so the big benefit of it, you can host it for free
in many places, for instance, on GitHub Pages or Cloudflare,
and they're secure and fast by default
because there's only static file serving involved.
And Zensical, so we try to make it pretty with a modern design,
many built-in features, and fun, according
to the feedback of our users, which
is kind of unusual for writing documentation.
So yeah.
MARK MANDEL: Yeah, very cool.
And if anyone's tried to manually create a static site,
It quickly becomes a challenge if you're just writing.
I say, hey, it's only five HTML pages.
I can just write the HTML, you know what I mean?
But well, what if you want to have common navigation?
Or you want to change the look and feel?
Oh, well, now I've got to go edit that in five places, right?
And so if even just beyond, basically beyond one page,
having something that generates the static site is--
it's super valuable, right?
because it'll generate the wrapper navigation,
the common CSS, the footer,
all those kinds of things, right?
Yeah, so it depends on what you want to do.
So, of course, if you have a small site,
like a personal website or so,
you can just write basic HTML if you're proficient in it.
For instance, the users of Material,
only 7% of them are front-end developers.
We will dive a little bit into how Zensical relates
material later and what zensigl is being used for primarily is for documentation so it builds on the
doccess code philosophy which means that you treat your documentation exactly like your source
code so you primarily write documentation you just you don't want to fight front-end development
problems you just want to keep the content like get the content out and with this docsis code what
the cool thing about is you can use the same tools and processes and workflows like you use for code
like versioning and prs to make changes and the adoption is growing really fast actually among
companies in recent years and they move as they're moving away from proprietary tools to open source
solutions so zenzigas for you or aesthetic aesthetic side generator in general is for you if you just
want to get out your get your writing out and of course you can also customize it and make it make
make it pretty as you want, but you don't necessarily need to know HTML, CSS, and JavaScript,
and that's quite practical.
And you talked about writing, and you even have your metaphor with strange attractors.
I personally find if I'm just in a clean space where it's really just about the ideas,
I don't have to worry about the design.
It makes it so much easier to just focus on the actual writing.
You're in a Markdown editor.
My favorite is TypeHora, but you can use whatever variety that you want, right?
And you're just there.
You're not worried even hardly about the formatting of the Markdown.
You're just writing.
And I find that a good creative space, I guess.
Yeah, that's the beauty of Markdown.
So you can just write, as you mentioned.
And how you, in the end, use it, you can still decide that afterwards.
So if you want to build a website, if you want to create a PDF of it, if you just want to use it for internal note taking or so.
And this is the big benefit of markdown as it takes away a lot of the headache of having to remember a lot of markup in order to get your ideas out of the door.
Can you actually put markup in it if you need to?
You know, for example, maybe you need a particular image, two of them side by side that are links and you want them to open in a new tab if somebody clicks them.
Can you set it into basically an unsafe mode and let it do embedded markup?
Yeah, that's a great question.
So, yes, it's possible.
You can just use HTML within Markdown.
We currently depend on Python Markdown, which we inherited from material for MKDocs.
we are gradually moving towards common mark,
which, so just as a context,
Python Markdown has some oddities
when you use HTML within Markdown.
For instance, it won't replace relative URLs correctly.
This is like an annoying thing.
But once we move to common mark,
we will also have like predefined components
that you can use because you can't express everything
like more complex things in plain Markdown.
So there are only things like you can make text bold,
you can have lists, tables, et cetera.
But if it's more complex, as you mentioned,
aligning to images or having an image with a caption or so,
you need basically HTML.
And this is possible already,
but we will make it much easier in the future.
The front-end world already knows this.
So they use MDX.
They've been using MDX for quite a while,
which is a dialect on top of Markdown
with adds more liberty with components and so on.
So you can create reusable components that you can use.
Yeah, but yeah.
So it's possible.
Our users already also do it.
We also have some examples on the documentation
and we will make it much more powerful in the future.
Yeah, very nice.
I do think regular markdown is just a few missing things.
I love the simplicity of it.
And hat tips, John Gruber, for creating it.
But it's just like, I just need to maybe put a class here
or just do a little--
if I could just control this a little bit more,
then you could basically escape HTML,
with obviously being careful to not just recreate HTML
with square brackets instead of angle brackets, right?
Yeah, there's been a lot of work on Python Markdown.
So in Python Markdown, there are some extensions that
allow you to add classes at least to block elements.
So markdown, you need to distinguish between inline and block
elements.
Oh, no, it also works-- sorry.
It also works on inline elements, like links and so on.
But this is special syntax.
So Python Markdown is a dialect that is not standardized,
like CommonMark.
In CommonMark, this is not easily possible
to add specific classes.
But with CommonMark, as I mentioned,
you have MDX, which is a de facto standard.
I don't know if they've standardized it already.
That allows for much, much more.
Nice.
So what is Zensical 4?
Is this a documentation generating tool?
Is it a just open-ended static site generator?
What is possible and what is your goal or your target with this project?
Yeah, so as I mentioned right now, we're focusing on documentation.
So because this is the thing we're coming from.
But we're building Zensical for much, much more.
So our stretch goal is to have a fully-fledged knowledge management and documentation solution.
There are already a lot of companies that use it internally for knowledge management.
Basically, as an alternative to ZaaS-based solution like Confluence and Notion,
we are aware that for this we need WYSIWYG.
So what you see is what you get.
A visual editor that is also usable by non-technicals.
And if you scroll, if you check out our roadmap and scroll down all the way, you will see it as a stretch goal, which is basically something we're working towards.
Because this would actually allow so much more people within organizations to use it.
And in general, Zensical, with Zensical, we focus on three key areas that make us different
from other static site generators, which is, well, a modern design.
So, of course, some also have a modern design, but within the Python ecosystem, some options
might look a little bit dated or a little bit, so we try to be a little bit more on the edge,
actually.
And it should be flexible and it should be fast.
So those three things.
Because the design actually is the thing that people notice first.
So what we offer is a design that is customizable, brandable.
You have like tons of options with which you can change how navigation is laid out.
How you can also change like colors, fonts, etc.
And we have a lot of components that make it ready for technical writing.
As you mentioned, you just want to start writing.
So we have stuff like admonitions, tabs,
and one very specific feature that we have is code annotations
that we inherited from Material for Enkid OX,
which is quite unique among static site generators,
which allows you to put a little bubble onto any line of code.
You have to visit our documentation.
This is our, you're currently browsing the other site.
All right, all right, hold on.
I got it.
Keep going, Michael.
I'll get to stay.
Right, right, no worries.
Yeah, and there you have to search for code annotations.
Yeah, so code annotations,
which allow you to create a bubble in any line of code.
And if you click that bubble, there opens a tooltip.
And within this tooltip, you can use any rich content.
So you can have lists, any formative markdown tables, diagrams,
basically anything you can use anyway within markdown.
And this is a very popular feature in Material.
And so, of course, we brought it over.
So users can still use it.
The second thing I talked about is it should be flexible.
So what makes Zensical different is we have a modular architecture
or say we're working towards a modular architecture.
We're still in alpha.
So we're close to finishing the module system.
And in Zensical, it's modules all the way down,
which means all core functionality is implemented as modules,
which is different from other solutions where the plugin system
sometimes is more or less an afterthought.
So there's a plugin system added
with specific hooks, extension points
where you can hook into.
And this might seem sufficient at first,
but in the end, so for us, for instance,
MKDocs in the end was a little bit limiting.
And this allows you to basically swap,
extend, replace all modules.
You can use our modules.
You can write your own,
pull in third-party modules.
And as I mentioned, Rust.
So don't worry.
You don't need to learn Rust.
you will also be able to write modules in Python
because we are super happy users of Pyro 3,
which is absolutely amazing library.
And Pyro 3 has really become a super important foundation
of Python these days.
It's almost like the C bindings for CPython.
Exactly.
So, yeah, so with Pyro 3,
it allows us to have a Rust runtime.
So all of the orchestration and how,
in which order things are run,
threading, caching, parallelization, etc.
All is happening in Rust
and we will provide Python binding
so that you still can use Python to write modules
and they're still running fast.
Yeah, which brings me to the last point
where we're different.
We have a very heavy focus on performance.
So our goal is to let you start with one page
because of course all documentation sites
or projects start small
and let you scale that to something like 100,000 pages.
How we do it is through differential builds.
We have created our own runtime, which is called ZRX.
And differential builds mean that we are only rebuilding what changed.
So, for instance, if you only change the page title, only that page and all instances where the page title is used are being rebuilt.
And this means that changes are visible in milliseconds and not minutes.
Yeah.
That's super cool.
And so I'm presuming the build system itself is Rust-based, right?
Yeah, exactly.
100 rust yeah yeah yeah and coming from a python background like how what was that experience like
building that yeah so um that's kind of a tricky question because i'm i'm i'm not really
coming from a long history of a puzzle so i don't have a long python background uh i wrote many
brought many in typescript um and i only started 2021 writing python um so this is actually like
the history how materials started and and how all of this unfolded um but um i've written in several
several languages so i also have written like in c erlang ruby python typescript um rust was still
extremely hard to learn so i basically banged my head against the keyboard for a month wasn't making
no progress at all because uh yeah you know fighting with the borrower checker so and once
Once you get past that, and then, of course, lifetimes and higher rank trade bounds and some other features, I'm now some kind of like 3,000 or 4,000 hours in, something like that.
It gets really good.
So I think Rust is seriously one of the best languages ever made because it allows you to express ideas extremely clearly with extreme clarity.
And this is due to the very good type system, of course.
And you get bare metal performance.
So I find it kind of insane having a language like Rust
because it's so easy to write once you're used to it.
You will be very productive and still have bare metal performance.
It's completely insane.
Yeah, that's wild.
But it's got a little bit of a learning curve
compared to like Python or TypeScript or something like that.
yeah so i had i think 18 years of experience with many languages um as i mentioned i already did i
also did a lot of c um and i still found it very hard to learn yeah but but it's uh if you so but
it's worth it it's worth it and my recommendation probably would be um to learn it on something
that you really care about so that you want to build because otherwise you will probably lose the
drive since you're running
against those walls.
Maybe for you or
for somebody else, it's much easier to learn.
So maybe it's just
I'm a bad example that I
needed so long. I don't know.
Because after that month,
it wasn't that I was completely
up to speed. So it was just
I was making very, very tiny progress.
At least progress. Because for a month
I wasn't making progress at all.
Yeah, wow.
So the next show that I'm doing after this one,
which actually is in real clock time, wall time,
it's happening in like two hours or less from now,
is with Samuel Colvin from Pydantic talking about Monty,
a Python runtime.
He and his team are rewriting in Rust,
specifically targeting AI.
So the Rust theme will continue.
It's definitely a very, it caught me a little bit off guard, like how much people love it.
But it's also, you know, it makes perfect sense that we want this nice modern language for writing lower level things, even if it plugs into Python, right?
Yeah.
So the fun thing is I also talked to Samuel a long time ago and he was the one recommending to me to write it in Rust.
So it's one of the reasons.
Yeah, definitely I looked into it.
And it made a lot of sense also during the time,
the progress we're making and so on
and the walls we're hitting that to reconsider learning Rust.
Best investment.
Yeah, amazing.
Amazing.
So I want to dig into your component structure
and some of those things.
But maybe before we do, let's talk about the origins a little bit.
So let's talk about how you went from material for MKDocs.
Why even change?
Why not just more material?
Yeah, so this is a great question.
And this is a little bit of a story.
So there are several stories in there, actually.
So it's 10 years.
I try to go make it as compact as possible while keeping the most important things.
So to those who don't know, material for MKDocs is a very popular documentation framework.
It's used by tens of thousands of projects.
There are prominent users like AWS, Microsoft, OpenAI.
Also, large open source projects use it,
like, for instance, FastAPI, uv, Knative.
And it's built on top of MKDocs, as the name says,
which became one of the most popular static site generators.
And it also eventually became my job.
So I could make it my job.
I could work in open source and earn a living somehow.
I'm getting there how that worked.
But at some point, we needed a new foundation.
We've kind of outgrown MKDocs because it was not evolving at the pace that we needed.
So we began exploring alternatives.
And yeah, so there's a lot of lessons learned in materials.
So let me shortly maybe talk about how it started.
Because it started as a side project in 2015, like many things start,
because I wanted to release actually a C library,
a zero copy protocol buffers library I wrote called Protobluff.
but then I realized that it needed more than a readme so I looked at the existing aesthetic
site generators which were Hugo, Jekyll, Sphinx, MKDocs, something like that and they all looked
a little bit dated. I'm not a designer but I wanted something more modern and Google was pushing
material design quite hard for app development at the time so and I've also seen it being used in
the web so I thought well maybe combine this. I quickly settled on MKDocs, was easy to use,
simple templating enough for a side project basically so it was a side project did what
most devs do it check the license and but didn't do any further due diligence so even put mkdocs in
the name to show the connection so which is common for themes and that actually turned out to be one
of the biggest decisions i made in my career since i was basing my complete work on somebody
something i don't control and it shaped the next 10 years of all of the work i was doing and is
actually the reason why Zensical exists today.
I see.
So after I started developing it,
I, like nine months later,
released the first version
and send a good users,
a lot of feature requests.
And, you know, it was a side project.
So I was doing client work at the time.
As I mentioned,
I've been like a consultant and developer,
freelancer for 20 years.
And I only had Sundays to work on it.
So, which at first was efficient, but the more popular it got, the more maintenance that came.
So, it kind of crept into my mornings and evenings.
And I was doing triage, like answering questions and trying to fix bugs before I went to the client.
And it was getting harder and harder to justify in front of my partner, actually, because I was doing it in my spare time.
And so I did what eventually all projects
that start as side projects
and where you don't have the full time to work on it,
how they, yeah.
So what basically happens is
you start turning down feature requests
and many open source projects don't cross this line.
And for me, it was a first.
So yeah, and also additionally,
so I mentioned before that I started writing Python in 2021.
At the time I was focusing,
So I only had Sundays to work on it.
I didn't know Python.
So I said that, okay, I will focus on the templating stuff.
I will do the HTML, CSS, JavaScript, all of this,
make it beautiful and try to solve as much,
as many problems as possible in the front end.
But I won't start learning Python
because it wasn't a language that I was using at that time
and I couldn't make up the time for it.
So that's where I drew the line.
It's probably going to be a fad, that Python thing anyway.
I don't think so, but...
Well, at the time, in 2015, it wasn't clear that it was going to be as popular as it is now, right?
It started to become popular then, but it's really taken over the world for a lot of reasons.
Of course, I think one of the main reasons is because it's very popular in the ML community
and all of the LLM AI work that's happening
and so on made it extremely popular.
So, and I also think that Rust is doing a very good job
on keeping it that way,
because finally you have a very easy way
to offload work to native code,
which is much easier than fiddling with C and C++
and void pointers and whatever.
So as I mentioned, Pyro3 is just an absolutely amazing library.
It's so easy to write Rust code.
- Yeah, I think you're right.
I think Rust has really provided an important escape hatch for,
I wrote it this way, it's not fast enough.
Like, well, this part, we're going to make it as fast as it can be, basically.
Yeah.
So.
All right.
Sorry, I interrupted you.
Keep going.
Oh, no worries.
No worries.
Yeah.
No, no.
So as I mentioned, I tried to keep it basically afloat for the first four years.
And at the time, I didn't see the potential at all.
It was just a theme, not a kind of product or so.
But yet I felt responsible and kept on maintaining it.
and my developer friends didn't understand why I was doing that.
But for me, it was kind of cool because I had a growing project.
I had no immediate plans.
I don't know.
Let's see where I can take it.
And with this steady and slowly growth over years,
then companies and organizations started using it.
So they were basing their public-facing documentation on me,
like the guy that maybe works on this project on a Sunday.
And yet I felt responsible enough to trying to fix the bugs reported as quickly as possible.
Yeah.
And yeah, then in 2020 actually came the turning point.
So when I was working on version five of it, I shared my progress publicly as I did before.
And somebody mentioned a donate button.
So I think the wording was something like so that I can order pizza to survive the long Sunday coding sessions.
But I heard from another developer who did this on his project,
successful project for five years, a donate button, and he made $90.
So I immediately said that's not going to work.
But I said, let's try an Amazon wish list.
You know, I just put some stuff on there.
And maybe if somebody thinks my work is useful,
then he can order me like, make me a present, something, send me a present.
So yeah, and I basically received everything on that wish list.
it was completely insane so there were two consecutive days that felt like christmas i even
put like so um i put some you know books and but then also uh single malt i i love scottish
scottish single malt uh it was a whiskey that cost 120 and i received that that as well so it
was like what's happening um and that led me to start thinking actually about demographics
so that I needed to better understand
the audience of material for MKDocs.
And I did a poll,
and the results were absolutely eye-opening.
I mentioned before,
7% only of users are front-end developers,
which means,
and material is a front-end heavy project.
So I kind of had an edge there
in the Python space
because, yeah,
it's based on Python,
so front-end developers
that write in JavaScript,
they rather go for something
like DocuSaurus or React-based or whatever.
And technical writers were quite happy with the project.
I didn't know even technical writers existed.
So I had no clue that this job,
that this is a job
because I thought at the time,
and it's in hindsight completely naive, of course,
I thought that as a developer,
you need to write the documentation, you know?
And so I learned about that
and accidentally built a product for technical writers.
And by the way, when I say product,
I mean something that is not necessarily
something you pay for but something that doesn't feel engineered so something that is like polished
and designed and that you actually want to want to use um and yeah so uh i had a product a product
that has like product market fit and but at the time i didn't earn any money off it so at the same
time i read about sponsorware and this like a i'm not sure if you heard of it but it's like a new
model of monetization for open source.
At the time, it was quite new
so that you can get paid for your work.
So some developers, for instance,
they sell course material or
access to gated content or code
or nothing at all. So if you have a
popular project, you can just try to
raise sponsorships from
some companies are very generous when it
comes to open source. And what we did
with Material was we gave away
early access to the latest features
to the sponsors. And each
feature was tied to a funding goal
that funding goal was met it became free for everyone so it was like kind of a funded uh
feature development in multiple stages and uh that's what i thought of it sorry yeah that's
super clever i really love the idea of uh providing something for the sponsors but still not turning
into well here's a paid version of our product and here's the open source version but there's always
this tension of how do you how do you reward the people who support you without undermining the
open source project and that's a clever angle yeah so that's extremely challenging um so
as i'm as i'm telling this so this is what i came up with when and i thought maybe it could work
something like that and again my developer friends they said will never work nobody will pay for
open source you're insane spoiler alert it did work and in the end we made 200k a year of it
and could build a team and everything.
So I know in Silicon Valley terms,
this is probably minimum wage,
but in Europe, it's quite an amount
with which you can work very well.
And yeah, so I started this program in 2020
and it grew steadily
and it finally allowed me to work on features
outside of the Sunday.
So invest more hours into it
and finally learn Python in 2021,
wrote my first plugin
and started hacking the mkdocs features that well that got turned down that that we
upstreamed but where the maintainer said ah it's maybe not a good fit or we don't have the time for
it and yeah in total i wrote 12 mkdocs plugins so it started as a theme but it turned into a popular
sorry into a powerful docs framework in the end and this worked quite well for several years
until it didn't anymore.
And that's the reason why Zensical then came into being.
So the way it didn't work is that,
like, just where you want to take it
started to diverge from MKDocs
or you couldn't get your changes upstreamed
or committed back?
So the thing was that MKDocs was not evolving
as we needed it.
So historically, MKDocs had a sequence of single maintainers.
And as far as I know, all of them worked on it in their spare time because they had regular jobs.
And Material was evolving quickly because we had funding.
We could invest much more time in it.
We could then, of course, then an open source project that is only maintained in spare time.
And so it was changing too slowly.
So we started a lot of discussions on necessary API changes because for many users, material for MKDocs was MKDocs.
So we were kind of like the storefront where most of the issues and like bug reports and feature requests came in.
Because many people are using material for MKDocs and with this MKDocs basically.
And the main challenges that we faced were performance and plugin orchestration.
I mentioned I wrote 12 plugins and it's very hard to make them cooperate.
And if you look at any popular MKDocs plugins issue tracker, you will find issues that go something like, well, this plugin is incompatible with this plugin.
Well, if I change the order of the plugins in the configuration, this and this happens.
So and both of those problems were brought to us again and again by the users with which we talked.
and so you know it was coming coming up a lot then suddenly after nine years the original
maintainer returned to mkdocs and we were super optimistic because the project was like maintained
again he also started a sponsorship program we upstreamed some of our funding immediately
and supported his work so before mkdocs have had no way to sponsor them and the moment this uh
this went live we immediately supported it and some prs were finally merged and issues were closed but
yeah then um the works went silent and you started working in in basically uh in the quiet
and three months later we were invited to a video call um so um we as maintainers from so i as a
maintainer for material for mkdocs and um some other key ecosystem maintainers and we learned
that mkdocs um that the plans for mkdocs 2.0 were completely different uh from what existed at the
So what currently exists, mkdocs 1.x, which primarily means no plugin API and customization via templating alone.
So we already knew this is not enough because that's what we've done the first four years where, as I mentioned, I was only doing the templating.
And some things you can't just do with templates.
For instance, having a tag support where you need to pull in different tags from different pages and then render them on another page or so.
So you need synchronization efforts and you can't do this with templating.
By the way, all of this information is public.
So you can read it on the MKDocs issue tracker.
So, yeah, I'm not telling anything secret or so.
Yeah.
So it's a completely different direction than the one that we worked on.
And we raised objections in the call.
But yeah, still they were dismissed.
So MKDocs 2.0, as it looks right now,
is incompatible with material for MKDocs.
300 plugins in the ecosystem will become useless
and tens of thousands of projects will be affected.
And for us, so we had absolutely no choice
than to start building something.
So to start make something of this,
because at the time we had already 50,000 projects,
50,000 public projects, depending on us.
We're talking to enterprise users, and we knew that this number is much, much higher.
So, for instance, one of our professional users, they already also sponsored material.
They have two and a half thousand projects internally.
So, only one company.
And they have a dedicated team of individuals that maintain their customizations on top of material for MKDocs for all of the teams inside the company.
It's a very big company.
So that's what you could infer from the I could believe it.
I couldn't believe it at all.
So absolutely insane.
Yeah.
So as I mentioned, we had no choice.
So what we did was we immediately went back to the drawing board with the learnings from the almost 10 years that passed since I started Material.
We built a lot of prototypes in TypeScript and Python, iterated on them.
We did a lot of conceptual work.
and realized within weeks
what could actually be done
with a radically different architecture.
Because writing 12 plugins,
I know the ins and outs of MKDocs.
I know the...
So I had to do a lot of hacks, for instance,
to make the block plugin of material work
with the way navigation works in MKDocs.
And the number one complaint, as I mentioned,
was MKDocs is slow and it doesn't scale.
So like fixing a typo, you're doing a full rebuild.
and this can take minutes.
So our design work centered exactly around this problem.
And after a short while,
so we knew exactly what MKDocs should look like
and we didn't want to let our users down.
And so in essence, we had two options.
We know what it should look like.
We could fork it or we could start from scratch.
And forking is not really possible
because of the way how Python dependencies work.
So all of the plugins have a dependency on MKDocs.
And this means that we would also need to fork all of...
So without doing black magic with imports,
which might not be the best idea.
So we would also need to fork all plugins
or all plugins would need to switch to the fork.
So this would be like moving an entire city at once.
And it's frankly impossible.
So, and if we would fork it,
we wouldn't be able to realize our learnings
that we gained in the groundwork that we did.
So we had to start from scratch, actually.
Right, plus you'd have to convince the entire community
to at least create a parallel package.
Because when you pip install that other plugin,
it's going to say, hey, PyPI, I need mkdocs.
And now you'd need the forked version,
whatever that's going to be called, right?
So, yeah, it would be a big battle, wouldn't it?
Just technically with...
Or you'd have to move the community,
which is a very challenging thing to do.
Yeah, and so for us,
the most sensible thing was to just, you know,
we just start from scratch.
We make it as compatible as possible.
It became quite clear very quickly
that we need to optimize for compatibility
because if you create something that is not compatible
and that forces users to migrate documentation manually
and to do a lot of work to get over to something else,
you won't get a lot of adoption.
Yeah, all you got to do is think about that 2,500 project team.
Like, okay, how do I keep them working with this, right?
Yes, yes.
Yeah, so what we then did is we had an idea how it should look.
Then we started with Rust because it was recommended to us.
So it was very hard at first.
And in total, it took us 16 months to build all of this.
But it was not only writing code.
It was also exactly knowing where we want to go.
Because, you know, we're starting fresh.
So we better be sure that we are going into a direction
where we actually want to go for the next 10 to 20 to 30 years.
Depends.
We are really in for this for the long game.
So the 10 years that I've been doing this,
I see that this is only the start.
And we wrote a lot of things from scratch.
So the runtime, as I mentioned,
that's like the heart of Zendicle.
It already has something like 15,000 lines of code.
A tiny HTTP middleware framework for file serving
because we don't want to,
so we also want to make the file server extensible
and don't want users to force them into async rust
and also don't have a dependency on Tokyo.
And also like a monorepo management tool
for Rust and JavaScript that we also open sourced,
which I'm not sure if you've worked with monorepos,
but in JavaScript, for instance,
there's Lerner and it has 800 dependencies.
So when you install it,
what you pull down is just insane.
So we worked a lot on the processes as well
that we can make releases very easy
and that we have a good way of working basically.
And we're very careful about our choice of dependencies.
So if it's not something that,
so let me put it another way.
If it's something that you can write quite quickly, actually,
and we rather own in order to make changes ourselves,
we rather write it from scratch.
Yeah.
I think that's a very healthy philosophy.
And also I think this agentic AI world that we're in these days,
if you just need one or two functions and you used to think,
well, maybe I'll lean on this.
in your case a crate or maybe a PyPI package or something.
But if it's just one or two functions,
maybe you really can just write it yourself without much effort.
And it just saves you so much trouble.
I started using pip-audit for a lot of my projects.
And I would say for my bigger projects,
every two weeks I get at least one CVE vulnerability notification
for something I'm using.
I'm like, but here's the thing.
It's in a situation of that,
probably a piece of code or functionality of that package
that I don't even use or care about.
So it doesn't really apply to me,
but then I've got all these like,
here's a latent issue that is in my code
that I'm going to have to figure out and deal with,
But it's because I've taken in so much as part of this package
where if I had just written the one or two functions,
then it'd be fine.
You know what I mean?
Absolutely.
I think things are swinging back a little bit from like,
let's just pull in everything because it's going to help us to like,
well, maybe not everything.
Yeah.
And also you can't just change things easily
and you depend on other APIs.
So, for instance, one of the reasons why we choose to build a lot of things from scratch is that we want to control the public API.
So, the worst thing for us would probably just be to export a third-party API that we're using as part of our public interface because it's Rust.
So, it would mean that if this public API would change, the entire ecosystem would break.
So we're very careful what APIs we expose
and rather wrap it in order to be safe
so we can replace things, keep things replaceable.
So maybe you have the philosophy of
it might be okay to use this crate,
but we don't exchange its types as the public,
as part of our API or something along those lines.
Yeah, we don't expose it.
So we, in some instance, the wrappers that I've wrote are identical to the types that we use from another crate.
But by using our own types or just wrapping them, because in Rust, the nice benefit is you have zero cost abstraction.
So all the code is monomorphized in line.
So you don't pay for wrapping code.
That's the absolute crazy thing.
So you can finally create a really clean architecture
without runtime penalties if you do it right.
Oh, that's wild.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Very interesting.
So you can see I have this huge list of topics.
We're basically just barely cracking the surface.
But I'd like to go back to this component.
Wrong search there.
you have a component
that was in the other part
let's just talk down and talk through some of these
these things here so you've got like
admonitions
buttons, code blocks
let's talk through some of the building blocks I guess that
you think are interesting here
yeah so I think
most of the
if you're not new to technical writing
most of the stuff shouldn't be
quite new so like
admonitions, code blocks, stuff like that
you've probably seen or data tables uh diagrams are just mermaid diagrams uh as they are as they
can you as you can use them on github uh one of the so like the flagship features in material
or and now zensical um as i mentioned like code annotations which is a part of code blocks um
otherwise we also have a an icon and emoji integration so um you can use one of i think
we have something like over 10,000 icons now with a quite simple syntax. That's not standard markdown.
That's the problem. So that's like a Python markdown extension. And we're working on moving this over
to common mark and finding a way to migrate this over. Because you know, right now it's Zensika
uses Python markdown for compatibility with materials for mkdocs, which means that for markdown
on rendering, we need to go through Python.
And this is a temporary limitation that we have,
because I mentioned we are focusing really hard
on compatibility.
And all of those components will also, of course,
be available within our CommonMark solution
that we're working on that we will ship later this year.
Yeah.
But right now, of course, you can use them
as they're mentioned on our documentation.
And we will, of course, provide automated tooling
to get them over to CommonMark.
yeah i guess it's interesting that you've got to not just consider the api and and the syntax
and stuff but maybe even the same parsing engine to have this strong compatibility right yeah we
can even read mkdocs yml configuration so you can build an mkdocs project with zendicle as it stands
the thing that we currently don't support in its entirety is the plugins from the ecosystem we
We already support some plugins.
For instance, the MKDocS strings plugin.
The author is also part of the Zensical team now
with MKDocS strings being the second biggest project
in the MKDocs space.
So we're very happy to have Tim on board.
And several other plugins.
But as I mentioned, so Zensical uses modules.
So what we will do in the end is
we will still always be able to read MKDocs configuration
and map the plugin configurations
to equivalent Zensical modules.
So the logic will be completely rewritten,
but you will be able to migrate your project
with a command.
That's our goal.
Because there has so much work been going on
into projects built with Material and MKDocs.
So we need to make it easy for users
and organizations to switch.
And this is the main part we're working on in 2026.
I think this is it's critical right if you yeah your absolute best users you know like that that
big company but many others of course they're not going to rewrite everything well maybe they will
but many of them won't rewrite everything they'll just use an old version and grin and bear it as
long as they have to you know what I mean like this idea of doing it from scratch but if
you provide a path for them that's very easy then all of a sudden they get this way better experience
right i can only imagine you know the build speed helping out the bigger projects the most
yeah and the compatibility part is one of the hardest engineering parts actually
so that you you have to think about that you know because we don't want to fade ourselves
paint ourselves into a corner so we need to think about where do we want to go but how can we
go there faster right now without making sacrifices in a way that we can't in the end replace things
and we have a pretty elaborate plan how to do all of this and yeah so we're working very hard on it
to make it so right now you can just use use material of course you can you can keep using it
or if your site already built in zensical you will have better speed and the modern design and the
better search so the search has been completely rewritten from material to um to zenzical it's
also it's currently integrated it's integrated with zenzical and we will open source it as a
dedicated open source project um it's it's called disco so you will also be able to use the search
in other projects and for um just as a number to to get a feel for it it's 20 times faster than
the search in material for MKDocs.
Wow.
So it's a ground-up rewrite.
And we actually started working on the search
before we started working on Zensical.
Yeah, I noticed how nice the search was
when I was playing with it.
We're in--
So is zensicle.org itself built in Zensical?
Yeah, of course.
And it's actually built with an MKDocs YML
because we're dogfooding.
So you can also build it with a mkdocs,
with material for mkdocs.
The project layout is exactly the same.
- Yeah.
You know, I find that there's just a bunch of static sites
that seem to have, I don't know what's going on with them,
but their search is really bad.
You know, either they've just integrated
some kind of Google thing where it says site colon
and they use your URL and then the search,
which is a real bad experience,
Or you go search and it sits there and it spins and it spins and then eventually it pulls up.
So it looks like you are pre-computing these types of things or something with your search engine
or you've got some cool data structure to make that fast, right?
Well, it's not one cool data structure.
That would be great because then everybody could just use it.
But no.
A series of algorithms.
Several months of work went into the search.
Of course.
So it's a project of its own, as I mentioned.
It's also completely modular.
And the reason why most of the search engines that are out there, that are open source,
so like the libraries that you can use, not services you have to pay for,
that they don't provide results that are really relevant or us,
is that they use BM25, which is like the standard bag of words ranking algorithm
for information retrieval.
and this doesn't nicely pair with autocomplete so what you get is you start typing and you get a
lot of dancing results because um and and also if you if you add uh further documents to your index
the the balancing will be off because it's it's um the relevance is computed based on the occurrence
of a word in the entire corpus so you add a new document those and those weights change again
the search that we have um we of course as a baseline also have a bm25 implementation
but the implementation you're seeing is a tie-breaking implementation which provides
much much better accuracy and you can configure it so tie-breaking means okay we first look into
the title of the document then and and see if we have matches then how many matches then where
they are then we look into the navigate in the path and then in the body of the document and so
on all of this is configurable and this is also why we believe that this go alone will also be a
very interesting projects for other,
for instance, static site generators to integrate.
And you asked about like pre-computing.
So no, this is a search from the documents.
We put a search index,
which is a strapped down version of the HTML
that is rendered when you load the page.
It's one JSON that we shipped to the client.
And for most pages, actually this JSON is below one megabyte.
You can GC it, so compress it.
then it's something like 200K and you have extremely fast search on the client with no cost.
And so we believe that for 90, 95, maybe 99% of documentation sites or sites in general,
this client site search is basically the way to go because it's fast and it doesn't require you to pay for anything.
And there are several ZaaS-based services that can be extremely expensive when you do the math.
so yeah
you only need to use a server
basically when you
when the index becomes too big to ship to the client
and we're also working on that by the way
okay that's really cool
you could shard
the index or something like that right
I suppose like you could say
we're going to have 26
index bits and only if
the word starts with an A
do you pull that piece down or something
but yeah
a lot of cool aspects
yeah it's not not that simple uh but uh there are also some other in some other interesting
solutions like page find is a pretty interesting library it does a completely different approach
but um it's not as snappy as um the search that we ship to the to the client yeah i use page find
for my personal website which is a static site yeah it's also a great great solution but um you
some things you won't be able to implement in PageFind properly.
Because, so it's, you know, it's with software, it's trade-offs all the way.
Well, I'm already thinking, like, I better pay attention to Disco when it comes out.
So maybe adopt it for some stuff.
Beautiful.
Okay.
We got a couple interesting questions sort of following up from the component side of things.
Jamstack says, do you foresee community-led templates or themes for Zensical?
I know you have like two themes that I see something along those lines a couple of themes
that you can choose now but what's the what is the theme story I guess I want to ask you more broadly
yeah so absolutely so right now we have only this one theme we have this variant setting where you
can choose like the classic variant which is if you when you move over from material for mkdocs
looks exactly the same. This is also why we needed to keep the HTML as it is also with the modern
design that we provided and the modern variant which is the standard for Zensical. Once we move
to the component system we will make it possible to one use components within markdown and two also
create a template engine that is based on components. This will allow us much much faster
rendering because for instance if you render the header uh on a for a site it's a lot of html because
you know there's the search box in it and some other stuff but only the title changes so we will
also make the rendering differential as part of the build that's the plan and with this uh
we will also make it open to um to theme developers of course so there will be um the like packaging
um for instance compilation of of zas um styles or typescript or so will be part of zensical
So you don't need to pre-compile the theme like we needed to do for the last 10 years for Material.
So it will have a proper asset pipeline.
It will have a proper process to install themes.
All of this is planned.
But right now we focus on feature parity in order to make it possible for more users to migrate right now.
That's really interesting that you would deliver the theme as basically its original source, not its rendered.
you know compiled or transpiled version right um to keep it i guess it's a part of this integral
build step right yes exactly because um it's we had a lot of requests for something like hey can
we change the media queries a little bit because the sidebar disappears too early for my um for my
taste and um this is not so for this you have to go through the compilation step again and basically
fork the theme and recompile it.
We want to make this configurable
so that you can use, yeah,
so, you know, configure the theme
and build it and it just works.
So this like, you know, it just works.
That's like the thing we're working towards.
Make it as simple as possible.
Yeah. Yeah, very cool.
Let's maybe, I'm getting short on time here,
maybe wrap up our chat
talking about two things, the future, where you go and you talked about
compatibility being a big part of things going forward in 2026, but also
sustainability, right? You had all these great supporters for material for MK
Docs, which you must have just been absolutely thrilled to realize how
successful that was, right? I mean, going from the wall, put up a wish list
and then actually people love this.
I can put all my energy into it.
I mean, I know how great of a feeling that is, right?
- That's completely insane.
And when I started it, I would never believe
that this would be my job at some point.
- Yeah, I feel the same way about the podcast
and it's just, I'm so grateful for it.
It's amazing.
- Yeah, I can imagine.
- Yeah, but then with this transition to Zensical,
how does that change?
Does that change anything or what's the story?
How do you bring that support over to Zensical?
As we don't have a lot of time,
I try to explain it as compact as possible.
So we are saying goodbye to this pay for features,
pay for extra features.
So in Material, you needed to be a sponsor
in order to get the latest features earlier.
What we will do is everything is open source from the start.
So for users, it's completely free.
And we are shifting our model from the sponsorships
to something we call Zensical Spark,
because what we discovered talking a lot
to our professional users is that the more we know
about the problem space and the better we understand
the problem space and the more we can collaborate with them,
the more we can, the better degrees of freedom
we can provide.
So we don't intend to just chip feature, feature, feature,
but we intend to create degrees of freedom
so that you can adapt Zensical to the processes
within your organization, how they work,
the workflows etc which are all different which is all very diverse basically so spark is a space
where you as a as a company can basically get a seat um and together with us shape zensical as
part of high level discussions where we explore problem the problem space we create proposals so
on the website you have clicked on the spark section um there's this zaps in progress we call
them zaps zensical advancement proposals it's on the left side um we write um very elaborate
detailed proposals on specific topics that we intend to work on and then um with the feedback
that we get iterate on them and um create a authoring like the ideal authoring experience
that um caters to the most cases possible um because we want to build zensical and as i
mentioned like for the very long term and not as just a solution that is opinionated but that is
as unopinionated as possible and the third thing that you get besides like those uh the
opportunity to discuss like high-level discussions with us and create the proposals with us is of
course professional support so this is also we've been asking we've been asked for quite a lot by
companies um so in spark you um yeah you can basically um get um our time you can we will
you can get direct access to the team and uh also we have like those open video calls uh where we
share our progress and where you can get a window of support and we talk about any problem that is
keeping you up at night basically and stuff like migrations or how do you do this and this in
Zensical and yeah it's it's been a blast so it's we're really happy that the organizations are
enrolling into this new model and we think it could also be a model that might translate quite
well to other projects because you get a huge competitive advantage you know exactly what to
builds.
Yeah, you're talking to the actual users.
They're saying, this is the thing that really is hard for us.
Or you just get, maybe they don't say it, but you see it, right?
Exactly, yes.
And talking to the users is the best thing you can do.
So what we learned from those, from the many times we talked to them, is always something
like, wow, we never would have come up with this.
Yeah, incredible.
So congratulations on the success for Material for MKDocs
and then this new project.
I'm very excited to see it coming along.
And it looks like it's going to be great.
Maybe a final call to action for people.
Like, can they go ahead and start using Zensical?
If they're interested, what do they do?
So on.
Yeah, of course.
So we mentioned Material for MKDocs a lot.
And this is because we are coming from this direction.
So it means if you have a material for MKDocs project, you should definitely try out Zensical and see if you can build your project.
But if you haven't used it, you can also just jumpstart a new project.
It has a lot of built-in functionality already.
You get like all of these components that we talked about, free search that you don't have to host, a very modern static site that is great on mobile.
So just give it a try.
And we have a newsletter where we once a month share the latest updates.
And that might also be worth checking out.
Yeah.
And otherwise, we'd be happy to see you, to get any feedback.
By the way, we also have a public Discord, a community Discord, which is growing very well.
So if you have any problems or so, then you will get help there.
Yeah.
Would be great to see as many users as possible, of course, and shape the future of Zensical together with all of you.
Fantastic.
Martin, thanks for coming on the show
congrats on the project
thanks for the invitation and
happy anytime to come back
yeah, sounds good
Yeah.